A shared Python interface for World Coordinate Systems
------------------------------------------------------

author: Thomas Robitaille, Erik Tollerud, Stuart Mumford, Adam Ginsburg

date-created: 2017 November 7

date-last-revised: 2017 November 7

type: Standard Track

status: Discussion


Abstract
--------

Astronomical data are often provided with information about the “real-world”
coordinates that correspond to pixel coordinates. This mapping is the essence of
the “World Coordinate System (WCS)” concept. In addition to FITS WCS (the origin
of the “WCS” term), other WCS standards/representations are becoming necessary
for new missions and observatories (e.g. the James Webb Space Telescope or the
Large Synoptic Survey Telescope). In order to build functionality in Astropy and
affiliated packages that may require use of WCS, having to deal with different
kinds of WCS objects with different APIs will be essentially impossible. Thus,
the purpose of this APE is to define a standardized interface to WCS objects
based on simple objects (strings, scalars, and arrays). Packages implementing
WCS objects will then be able to either modify their classes to conform to the
API recommended here, or build thin wrappers that conform to the API. The APE
also provides a recommendation for a high-level object to be implemented in
Astropy that understands familiar Python objects such as ``SkyCoord``, ``Time``,
and other Astropy classes.

Detailed description
--------------------

Background/Terminology
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

One of the key basic operations necessary for any astronomical data analysis is
the association of “pixels” with their “real-world” coordinates (and vice
versa). While this concept has existed essentially for as long as computers
have been used on astronomical data, the FITS WCS standard (`Calabretta &
Greisen, 2002, A&A 395, 1077 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:20021327>`_)
gave this concept a name: “World Coordinate System” (WCS). Because of this,
“WCS” and “FITS-WCS” are often treated synonymously, but the concept is of
broader applicability, as evidenced by the existence of serialization formats
and Python packages that perform this task (e.g., gWCS, pyast). Hence, we use
the term “WCS” to refer to the broad concept of WCS, rather than the specific
FITS-WCS representation and implementation.

For the purposes of this APE, we define WCS transformations as mapping pixels to
some world coordinate (or the inverse). In our terminology, *pixel* is a
generalized concept of some form of ordered in-memory (or on-disk) storage of
data. While we use pixel as a shorthand, this need not be only two-dimensional
(the typical usage of *pixel*) - it includes one-dimensional (e.g., spectral
axes), or more-than-2-dimensional (e.g., data cubes). Similarly *world* in this
context is a generalized concept of any sort of physical coordinate used in the
data. Exactly what that physical interpretation is is not specified in the
concept of WCS. For the purposes of this APE, *world* could even be an
intermediate state of knowledge. E.g., for the unity transformation the world
coordinate *is* the pixel coordinate, for example if no calibration information
has yet been determined. But some sense of direction and a language for the
physical type and representation of a world coordinate needs to be conveyed in
any practical implementation of WCS. A common understanding of how to convey
that information, and represent it in Python, is the primary subject of this
APE.

Scope
^^^^^

This APE is not meant to limit further development on more generalized
coordinate transform APIs. A future APE may define the API for accessing
“intermediate frames” as used in gWCS or the LSST transform systems. This APE
is only intended to define a clear API for converting from pixel coordinates to
a specific end set of “world” coordinates (as defined above). This APE doesn’t
focus on how to get intermediate frames if they are present, or combining
together multiple steps of a transformation - while such functionality is useful
and should be *compatible* with this APE’s interface, an API for these
operations is out-of-scope for this APE. This APE also does not address how to
*create* such WCSs. Rather it is aimed specifically at an API for the simpler
problem of actually performing the “end-to-end” transformation from pixel to
some world space.

Overview of the proposed WCS Interface
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Our proposal in this APE is the following:

* To develop a common API that WCS objects can expose, either directly or
  through thin wrappers, and which will allow functionality accessing the WCS
  objects to be agnostic of the actual WCS representation. We want this API to
  be as simple as possible and mainly return simple Python objects such as
  strings, lists and arrays. We refer to this as the ‘low-level’ API.

* To develop a high-level Astropy WCS object that can wrap any WCS object
  providing the low-level API and be smarter about the kinds of objects to
  accept or return to the user (including for example SkyCoord or Time objects).

The idea of this two-tiered approach as opposed to a single-tier approach is
that if we asked different WCS objects to provide a high-level API, this would
(1) cause a lot of duplication of logic of constructing the appropriate Astropy
objects, and (2) force those objects to return specifically Astropy objects,
whereas having a package-independent API would be better.

Low-level API
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The proposed low-level API could be implemented as an abstract base class but we
would not require all implementations to inherit from it (if they do not inherit
from it, then they should still register with the ABC to allow code to check
isinstance(object, LowLevelWCSAPI)). Existing WCS classes are then free to
either implement that interface or provide thin wrappers providing this
interface. A guiding philosophy of this interface is use relatively primitive
python objects (scalars, arrays, and strings), which can be “promoted” to more
complex and useful Python objects in the high-level interface. This allows
straightforward implementation of this interface even in C-implemented Python
objects, without tying that into the high-level interface.

The following class shows the required properties and methods the uniform
low-level API recommends:

.. code-block:: python

    class LowLevelWCSAPI(metaclass=abc.ABCMeta):

        @property
        def n_dim_pixel(self):
            """
            The number of axes in the pixel coordinate system
            """

        @property
        def n_dim_world(self):
            """
            The number of axes in the world coordinate system
            """

        @property
        def world_axis_physical_types(self):
            """
            Returns an iterable of strings describing the physical type for each
            world axis. They should be names from the VO UCD1+ controlled
            Vocabulary (http://www.ivoa.net/documents/latest/UCDlist.html).
            If no matching UCD type exists, this can instead be "custom:xxx",
            where xxx is an arbitrary string.  Alternatively, if the physical
            type is unknown/undefined, an element can be `None`.
            """

        @property
        def world_axis_units(self):
            """
            Returns an iterable of strings given the units of the world
            coordinates for each axis. The strings should follow the recommended
            VOUnit standard (though as noted in the VOUnit specification
            document, units that do not follow this standard are still allowed,
            but just not recommended).
            """

        @property
        def axis_correlation_matrix(self):
            """
            Returns an (n_world, n_pixel) matrix that indicates using booleans
            whether a given world coordinate depends on a given pixel coordinate.
            This should default to a matrix where all elements are True in the
            absence of any further information. For completely independent axes,
            the diagonal would be True and all other entries False.
            """

        def pixel_to_world_values(self, *pixel_arrays):
            """
            Convert pixel coordinates to world coordinates. This method takes
            n_pixel scalars or Python array types as input, and pixel
            coordinates should be zero-based.
            Returns n_world scalars or arrays in units given by ``world_axis_units``.
            """

        def world_to_pixel_values(self, *world_arrays):
            """
            Convert world coordinates to pixel coordinates. This method takes
            n_world scalars or arrays as input in units given by ``world_axis_units``.
            Returns n_pixel scalars or arrays.
            """

        @property
        def world_axis_object_components(self):
            """
            A list with n_dim_world elements, where each element is a tuple with
            two items. The first is a name for the world object this world array
            corresponds to, which *must* match the string names used in
            ``world_axis_object_metadata``. Note that names might appear twice
            because two world arrays might correspond to a single world object
            (e.g. a celestial coordinate might have both “ra” and “dec” arrays,
            which correspond to a single sky coordinate object). The second
            element is  either a string keyword argument name or a positional
            index for the corresponding class from
            ``world_axis_object_metadata``.
            """

        @property
        def world_axis_object_metadata(self):
            """
            A dictionary with each key being a string key from
            ``world_axis_object_components``, and the value being a 2-tuple.
            The first element of the tuple must be a string specifying the
            fully-qualified name of a class, which will specify the actual
            Python object to be created. The second tuple element must be a
            dictionary with the keyword arguments required to initialize the
            class.

            Note that we don’t require the classes to be Astropy classes since
            there is no guarantee that Astropy will have all the classes to
            represent all kinds of world coordinates. Furthermore, we recommend
            that the output be kept as human-readable as possible.
            """

We now take a look at an example of use of ``world_axis_object_components`` with
``world_axis_object_metadata``. An example output from both methods on the same
WCS object is:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> wcs.world_axis_object_components
    [('skycoord', 'ra'), ('time', 0), ('skycoord', 'dec')]
    >>> wcs.world_axis_object_metadata
    {'skycoord': (‘astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord’,
                  {'frame': 'fk5', 'equinox':'J2005'}),
     'time': (‘astropy.time.Time’, {'scale': 'tai'})}

This indicates that the first and third world axis can be used to instantiate an
Astropy ``SkyCoord`` object with ``ra=`` set to the first world axis, and
``dec=`` set to the third axis, and the ``frame=fk5`` and ``equinox=J2005``
arguments, while the second world axis can be used to instantiate an Astropy
``Time`` object as the first positional argument, and with the ``scale=tai``
keyword argument. Note that the coordinate frame classes could be custom
sub-classes if needed.

Low-level API examples
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Simple 1D spectrum** - 1D mapping from pixel to wavelength:

.. code-block:: python

    wcs.axis_correlation_matrix = [[True]]
    wcs.world_axis_units = [‘angstrom’]
    wcs.world_axis_physical_type = [‘spectral’]
    wcs.world_axis_object_components = [(‘spec’, 0)]
    wcs.world_axis_object_classes  = {‘spec’:(‘astropy.units.Wavelength’:
                                              {‘airorvacwl’: ‘air’})}

**Simple 2D image mapping** where the axis are just RA and Dec (in FITS-WCS this would be CAR)

.. code-block:: python

    wcs.axis_correlation_matrix = [[True, False], [False, True]]
    wcs.world_axis_units = [‘deg’, ‘deg’]
    wcs.world_axis_physical_type = [‘pos.eq.ra’, ‘pos.ra.dec’]
    wcs.world_axis_object_components = [((‘sc’, ‘ra’), (‘sc’, ‘dec’)]
    wcs.world_object_data  = {‘sc’:(‘astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord’,
                                {‘frame’: ‘icrs’})}

**Extremely complex spectral data cube** with 3 *pixel* dimensions and 4 *world*
dimensions. First two *pixel* dimensions encode a mixed set of spatial
dimensions and a 3rd dimensions that’s completely spectral (i.e., the output of
an IFU detector), and the third *pixel* dimension is a separable 4th world
dimension encoding time-of-observation.

.. code-block:: python

    axis_correlation_matrix = [[True, True, False],
                               [True, True, False],
                               [True, True, False],
                               [False, False, True]]
    world_axis_units = [‘deg’, ‘deg’, ‘angstrom’, ‘day’]
    world_axis_physical_type = [‘pos.galactic.lon’, ‘pos.galactic.lat’, ‘em.freq’, ‘time’]
    world_axis_object_components = [(‘spat’, ‘ra’), (‘spat’, ‘dec’),
                                    (‘spec’, 0), (‘time’, 0)]
    world_object_data  = {‘spat’: (‘astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord’,
                                   {‘frame’: ‘icrs’}),
                          ‘spec’: (‘astropy.units.Wavelength`, {}),
                          ‘time’: (‘astropy.time.Time’,
                                   {‘format’:’mjd’, ‘scale’:’utc’})}

**The identity transform** for a 1D array (i.e., pixel -> pixel):

.. code-block:: python

    wcs.axis_correlation_matrix = [[True]]
    wcs.world_axis_units = [‘pixel’]
    wcs.world_axis_physical_type = [‘instr.pixel’]
    wcs.world_axis_object_components = [(‘spec’, 0)]
    wcs.world_axis_object_classes  = {‘spec’:(‘astropy.units.pixel’: {})}

Common UCD1+ names for physical types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As outlined above, the ``world_axis_physical_types`` attribute should include
strings that fullow the VO UCD1+ vocabulary for defining physical types. The
`full UCD1+ vocabulary <http://www.ivoa.net/documents/latest/UCDlist.html>`_
includes a large number of options, but here we summarize some of the most
common ones that will likely be used::

    em.energy                | Energy value in the em frame
    em.freq                  | Frequency value in the em frame
    em.wavenumber            | Wavenumber value in the em frame
    em.wl                    | Wavelength value in the em frame
    instr.pixel              | Pixel (default size: angular)
    pos.az.alt               | Alt-azimutal altitude
    pos.az.azi               | Alt-azimutal azimut
    pos.bodyrc.lat           | Body related coordinate (latitude on the body)
    pos.bodyrc.long          | Body related coordinate (longitude on the body)
    pos.cartesian.x          | Cartesian coordinate along the x-axis
    pos.cartesian.y          | Cartesian coordinate along the y-axis
    pos.cartesian.z          | Cartesian coordinate along the z-axis
    pos.ecliptic.lat         | Ecliptic latitude
    pos.ecliptic.lon         | Ecliptic longitude
    pos.eq.dec               | Declination in equatorial coordinates
    pos.eq.ra                | Right ascension in equatorial coordinates
    pos.galactic.lat         | Latitude in galactic coordinates
    pos.galactic.lon         | Longitude in galactic coordinates
    pos.healpix              | Hierarchical Equal Area IsoLatitude Pixelization
    pos.heliocentric         | Heliocentric position coordinate (solar system bodies)
    spect.dopplerVeloc       | Radial velocity, derived from the shift of some spectral feature
    spect.dopplerVeloc.opt   | Radial velocity derived from a wavelength shift using the optical convention
    spect.dopplerVeloc.radio | Radial velocity derived from a frequency shift using the radio convention
    time                     | Time, generic quantity in units of time or date
    time.epoch               | Instant of time related to a generic event (epoch, date, Julian date, time stamp/tag,...)

The full UCD1+ vocabulary does not include all possible type names that would be
needed to represent **all** WCSes (for example, there are no keywords for
helioprojective coordinates). In this case, the element of
``world_axis_physical_types`` for those coordinates should be a string prefixed
with ``custom:``. This should also be taken as a call to work with the
International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) to implement
new type names, which the Astropy Project will facilitate as needed. If a
``custom:`` type name is needed, we recommend that these be coordinated and
agreed as much as possible between different packages to make sure that these
can be useful (which would not be the case if each package created their own
set of custom type names).

High-level Astropy Object
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Unlike the low-level API, the ‘high-level’ interface described here will be a
single Astropy-developed class since it interfaces with various Astropy objects.
This high-level API would provide the ability for example to get ``SkyCoord``,
``Time`` etc. objects back from a pixel to world conversion, and conversely to
be able to convert ``SkyCoord``, ``Time`` etc. to pixel values.

The high-level object would not inherit from the low-level classes but instead
wrap them. The high-level object should provide at a minimum the
following two methods:

.. code-block:: python

    def pixel_to_world(self, *pixel_arrays):
        """
        Convert pixel coordinates to world coordinates (represented by Astropy
        objects).
        """

    def world_to_pixel(self, *world_objects):
        """
        Convert world coordinates (represented by Astropy objects) to pixel
        coordinates
        """

The low-level object must be available under the attribute name ``low_level_wcs``
and the low-level methods such as ``pixel_to_world_values`` will thus be
available by doing:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> wcs.low_level_wcs.pixel_to_world_values(...)

Since a single Astropy object might correspond to two non-contiguous dimensions
in the WCS (for example the first and third world dimensions), we need to
specify the rules for the order in which Astropy objects are returned from the
high-level ``pixel_to_world`` method, and in which order they should be given to
the high-level ``world_to_pixel`` method. The standard order should be that
given by considering only the first occurrence of the coordinate alias string in
``world_axis_object_components``. For example, if
``world_axis_object_components`` is

.. code-block:: python

    [('skycoord', 'ra'), ('time', 0), ('skycoord', 'dec')]

Then the order of the Astropy objects should be ``SkyCoord`` then ``Time`` (we
essentially ignore ``('skycoord', 'dec')``). This rule will always be followed
for ``pixel_to_world``, but on the other hand provided there is no ambiguity,
``world_to_pixel`` could be more forgiving if the coordinates are specified in
the wrong order (though an error should be raised if there are any ambiguities
and the order is not the standard one).

Branches and pull requests
--------------------------

N/A

Implementation
--------------

The low-level API could be implemented specifically for FITS-WCS into the
Astropy core package, along with the more general high-level Astropy object.
Other projects can then choose to implement objects conforming to the low-level
API in their own packages.

Backward compatibility
----------------------

N/A

Alternatives
------------

A possible alternative to consider is simply leave things status quo and have no
agreed-on API. Rather instead have Astropy endorse a specific implementation
like gwcs as the API to assume for when wcs objects are needed (e.g. NDData and
spectroscopic objects). However, this would likely lead to less uptake of the
upstream objects that require wcs. E.g., while ``astropy.wcs`` is a
commonly-used case in the present, it does not support new use cases like LSST
or the distortion models for JWST, and is tied specifically to the FITS format.
Therefore tools that wish to support both FITS WCS *and* newer systems would
have to write their own complex logic for doing so, as well as potentially even
more complex logic for converting the wcs outputs into composite Python objects.
The structure outlined in this API would make that unnecessary by instead having
a single interface that user code can write against, and only needs to consider
other details when creating or modifying wcs.

On a more specific note, the primary reason for using a string as the key for
the dictionary for ``world_axis_object_classes`` (and the corresponding names in
world_axis_object_components) is because there might be multiple world axes that
need to use the same class. Otherwise a simpler solution would have been to use
the class object *itself* as the key.

Additionally, for ``world_axis_physical_types``, an alternative was considered
of adopting a much more general set of terms vs UCD1+ such as ``"celestial"``,
``"spectral"``, etc. And just coming up with the list in this APE (possibly
using terms that approxmiately align with the STC standard).  But it was decided
that adopting the VO UCD1+ would be best because it would not lead to Astropy
needing to maintain a separate "standard" of terminology where one already
exists.


Decision rationale
------------------

<To be filled in by the coordinating committee when the APE is accepted or rejected>
